---
layout: post
title: "Götterdämmerung"
date: 2019-10-04
categories: "reflective reader"
---


*Abstract: I review a performance of Twilight of the Gods, commenting in roughly such order: on listening experience, music interpretation, staging and design, and Wagner's composition itself as a drama and a piece of music.*

This production of *Twilight of the Gods* (*Götterdämmerung*) is conducted by Shao-Chia Lü (呂紹嘉), and directed by Carlus Padrissa. Brünnhilde is played by Rachel Nicholls, Siegfried by Lance Ryan, Hagen by Andrea Silvestrelli, Gunter by Lauri Vasar, Gutrune by Sandra Trattnigg. According to the credit, it is originally staged by La Fura Dels Baus.

It was the Oct 4 performance, in National Taichung Theater, that I attended. It was the first time I entered this lofty modernistic building, having opened about exactly 3 years ago. One walked in the middle of huge curved pillars, and came up several set of stairs to get to the big hall where the performance was to take place. There, a large orchestra pit could be accommodated, which the National Concert Hall couldn't do. There were medium- and small-halls too. Indeed, just now there was a listening guide (presenter called 呂岱衛), holding in the medium hall that had started at about 16:00, which I joined. The talk was very helpful. We were given free brochures, which summarized the plot and verbal description (but without score examples) of leitmotifs.

Act 1 lasted from 17:15 to 19: 10; Act 2 from 19:45 to 20:45; Act 3 from 21:10 to 22:30. In the two long intermissions, stands were selling absurdly expensive light food, but hungry people still bought that, myself included. When it ended, I was fearing that I could not catch the train to Taipei, but I managed to stay for another 10 minutes to give stand ovation, for applauding was more important. But I took a taxi, and caught the last train successfully, thus making perfect use of today's schedule.

Before this, I kind of thought Wagner to be dry, and even hypnotic, and so I was not a big fan of his. This time I decided to gave it a try, out of curiosity to see in person what a full-fledged *Ring* production would be like. Moreover, this Spanish team had collaborated with the opera house for 4 years in a row, and it was to be the last one in the cycle. The *Ring* was not something commonly performed in entirety, and the next time can mean forever. So I went to the concert.

And I do not regret it at all! My prejudice against Wagner dispels, and I think he is meant to be watched, which seems so obvious in retrospect!

The orchestra accompaniment is of high quality: overall the music flows smoothly, and very little mistake is made. Somehow the interpretation is more controlled than agitated, but I am not sure. I am seated in the principal hall, level with the stage, with ticket priced 3 000 NTD, at the point one-third the width to the right wall, and one-third the depth to the back wall. The acoustic experience is really great, and I am also close enough to see the actor's facial expression. When one has listened to a real, full-sized orchestra, recordings pales in comparison. Tubas, timpani, and double bassoons are particularly grandiose to hear in real time.

The singers are impressive too. Apart from daunting register and sheer volume that Wagner demands, the roles of Siegfried and Brünnhilde call for a youthful vividness. Siegfried's voice part is especially challenging. There are *piano* passages which involves notes as high as $$A_4$$, and his highest note throughout the work (I recall) is $$C_5$$! And when he is to die, and kneels and lies face-down on the floor, calling Brünnhilde's name, Siegfried even sings as effortlessly as usual. This being said, Hagen's voice is particularly sonorous, while being somehow coarse (but not displeasingly so), which strangely suits the sinister character of his. Though Siegfried and Brünnhilde are extraordinary enough to compete with the orchestra, the resounding voice of Hagen's still overwhelms theirs.

On the other hand, the stage and costume design are eccentric. First, the costume is in the science fiction style. That apart, there are more obscure symbolism all over the place, like numbers in Chinese characters, and a big $$\pi$$ (as big as his chest) printed on the back of Gunther's coat—No, I didn't expect the LaTeX feature of WordPress will come in handy in this music review. Everybody wears western suits, except for the quasi-primitive outfit Siegfried wears in the very beginning, and the incongruity can be odd.

Most of the time, the stage is empty (except perhaps for tables and chairs), and the surroundings are hinted only by image projection. The minimalism policy in costumes and props works okay, but it probably was not what Wagner expected, considering that the composer built a cutting edge theater to make his lavish production possible.

The minimalism can be too much, for example, in the last dramatic event, that Hagen should have been devoured into the River Rhine to death. This is not shown directly, but instead, Hagen (or another one?) rides on a electronic unicycle and falls onto the ground. (To be sure, it is difficult to tell what's happening in the midst of a swarm of acrobats.)

The director also incorporates some acrobat performance, which is not a bad thing, but it is unfortunate that the acrobats' endeavor can't be integrated more effectively to the main part of the story. In end of act 1, purported nudes (in skin-colored bodysuit) appear and wiggle on the rock where Brünnhilde resides, when Siegfried, disguised as Gunther, swears by the sword that he will not touch Brünnhilde. So what do the nudes signify? They can't mean the lust Siegfried has for Brünnhilde, which he has none after drinking the love potion. Similarly in the end of act 2 these entertainers make virtuoso jumps in the supposed realm of gods, not sure what that signify. In the end of Act 3, acrobat performers, hung like flying trapeze, again impressively circles around Siegfried's dead body, which is said to be the building of Valhalla on the brochure. (I guess it is due to ease of arrangement, that they always introduce acrobats in the concluding section only.) At least the positive thing (not being sarcastic) is that they make good use of the vertical visual room in this spacious hall.

In addition to acrobats, the director is trying very hard to prevent audiences from sleeping, by projecting animation on the screen, when purely instrumental interludes are playing. It shows, e.g., the sea Siegfried is in, when he goes on his adventures in Act 2. So, though it turns out really hard to feel sleepy, animation can be a bit ludicrous, given the serious nature of the drama.

Finally on the composition itself. To begin, the plot of the whole *Ring* cycle is actually rather well arranged. There are interlocking action out of love and hatred, loyalty and betrayal, making characters well-rounded and complicated. And introduction of physical devices (e.g. the ring and helmet) and character relation often foreshadows later development.

It is so heartbreaking that, in the story, if anyone had throw the ominous ring away in any stage, the characters will avoid their doomed fate. Like the moment that the Rhine girls is teasing Siegfried, the composer portrays his reckless character in great precision. Money is nothing to Siegfried, and he is almost to give the ring away when the Rhine girls pledge him so. But when they warn him of the tragic ending he is facing, he ironically determined to keep the ring instead, in rebel to the fate.

Meanwhile, admittedly, there are also some inconsistency in the plot. For example, in the last part of Act 2, surely Gunter does not know the fact that Brünnhilde has been united with Siegfried. But when Brünnhilde says that there is a vulnerable spot on Siegfried's back, doesn't Gunter suspect that there is something between them? As another instance, why is Siegfried just about to come to the Gibichungs' castle, the moment Hagen, Gunther, and Gutrune there finishes the discussion of their evil plan? This is too much a coincidence. But these problems may also have something to do under the limitation of transition of scenes.

As for the music, the heart of Wagner's success (or failure) is his introduction and use of leitmotifs. In its best, the effect is remarkable and highly satisfying. Like the section that Siegfried recounts his adventure: previous leitmotifs appear, in relevant order, when he describes the people and things, all constructed tightly and organically. Also the very last section that Brünnhilde jumps into the flames to her death, is also a masterpiece; it eloquently reminds us of — and summarizes — the whole franchise, by a series of leitmotifs, collectively suggestive of the theme of destruction and redemption.

So how may Wagner still appear abstruse to some? I guess it is due to fact that his melodies usually lacks distinctive shape. In fact, they are not changed and developed as much as what Beethoven often does to them in his sonatas and symphonies. But they follow leitmotifs rather faithfully — a tremendous constraint. I now remember nothing of the melody, but can't forget (and can be tired of) the ever-repeating leitmotifs.

And Wagner seldom writes heavy contrapuntal lines, nor introduces rhythmic complexities, leaving the melody subordinating to homophony. I would appreciate if Wagner had written more duets and trios, as in the *Ring* the parts mainly consist of a single voice. (There is only one section, namely the argument between Gunter, Brünnhilde, and Hagen in the last section of Act 2, as mentioned above, that may be loosely counted as a trio.) In this regard, singers can be considered as  just another music instrument.

Wagner's harmony is not progressive, if that can be a factor too. One peculiarity of his is the use of the so-called half-diminished 9th chord (e.g., $latex \{B_3, D_4, F_4, A_4, C_5\}$). Here the minor ninth is unnatural, and does sounds like avant-garde, but apart from that, he retains a generally classical harmony usage.

Generally, though I am sympathetic to Wagner's rationale of introducing leitmotifs, I gather that it does not quite work out. Indeed, what Wagner's idiosyncrasy dismays people (and sometimes me), is precisely what pleases his fans, and what he considered to have been his contribution. And this is probably true to every inventive artist. Wagner is still not my favorite opera composer, but I recognize his effort and praise his ingenuity. Maybe I will grow liking him, maybe not. I do replay other *Ring* albums on Spotify from time to time, and the more I listen to them, they do seem the less daunting and the more enjoyable.
